TROUBLESHOOTING OF COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
AMIABEL AVELYN B. MAGLAHUS 
BSCPE4A

The subject, Troubleshooting of Computer Systems is one of the most needed amd very important in Computer Engineering course curriculum. As a computer engineering student of Bohol Island State University - Main Campus (BISU - MC), it is required to take and pass this subject and learn and remember it by heart. Subject code CPE421, Troubleshooting of Computer Systems, which has 2 units for lecture and 1 unit for laboratoy, a total of 3 units was formerly instructed by Engr. Ralph Vicent Galao but because he resigned in his teaching profession, he was then replaced by newly and fresh graduate, Engr. Mac Angelo Perin. We, computer engineering students of BISU - MC, think that the programming is the m, good and efficient computer engineer, we must also learn and know the basic about computers, its troublqsily and lightly because this has no programming at all, but better we not. Being good at programming but have is not knowledgeable in troubleshooting is a shame of a computer engineer. Just by having knowledge about troubleshooting plus a good computer programming skills make us more deserving to be entitled as a Computer Engineer. That is why, Troubleshooting of Computer Systems is one of the subject that will be a great help for us to become a good computer engineer.
According to techterms.com, troubleshooting is the process of diagnosing of a problem in your computers or laptops, it maybe software or hardware. Troubleshooting of Computer Systems teaches not just computer engineering students but also those computer related courses to find and fix their problems with their computers or laptops. Troubleshooting cam be applied not just for the students, but also to those who want to recognize and repair problems with their computers and laptops at home or at work. It can be easily learned by yourself because the guides, tips, step by step process and the answers to all your questions are already found in the internet. The google and youtube is a great help in self learning. But sometimes, videos and articles are fake or some information are missing, that is why it is better and advisable to learn from the expert or professional. I'm sure that mostly have computers and laptops in their homes, for personal or work use. I'm also sure that many of them encounter common computer problems and some of them doesn't know how to recognize and fix it, and honestly, im not an exemption. Even I am a computer engineering student, trying to troubleshoot my own laptop is very hard and scary to do because it might give more damage. That's why computer and laptops users, including me, prefer to approach a computer technician, rather than trying to fix it, to repair our damage computer and laptops, and waste a large amount of money for the professional fee over a simple and self repairable computer or laptop issue. Because of this, I became interested and I attentively listened in thjs subject.
Students enrolled in this subject were assigned to report som common computer problems and some technical terms. They talked about a small overview about a computer part then their possible problems and solutions to it. I may not remember everything we tackled but I am sure that I have enough knowlede in troubleshooting which is a great help for me. I realized that some common computer problems does not need a thorough fixes and a step-by-step process. You just need to check if the cables attached on your computer or laptops are properly connected and functioning or the parts of the computer are properly seated on its slot. There was one time that we troubleshoot a Raspberry pi model B and look for a problem. The Raspberry pi model B didn't function or open when we turned it on and we found out that the problem is not the Raspberry pi itself but the charger we used. We used a charger that wasn't compatible with the Raspberry pi, since the model B uses between 1000mA depending on what peripherals are connected. On our final troubleshooting we connected it to the right and compatible charger and finally it was functional and still working. I also remember that they tackled about how to maintain and take good care of the computers or laptops. I know that mostly computers and laptops users, look for their laptops and computers carefully because it is new and shiny. After days, months and years of use, we don't mind and don't care anymore even if it is full of dust and dirt. We just leave it there until it will be notice by someone or it is bothering us or it is malfunctioning. That practice is bad and not advisable because there are some external parts that are easily get damage just like monitor, keyboard and mouse, andyou will pay another large amount of money for repair and for the parts needed to be replaced. You must be also very careful on what you insert on your Universal Serial Bus (USB) ports and the application you are going to install to avoid viruses and great damage for lifetime which the only solution is to reformat or replace your computer or laptop. So taking good care of your computers and laptops - hardware and software - will give it more years to be useful.
This subject is very student-friendly because it didn't add more burden for us. My only suggestion is that after reporting, there should be a hands-on of the topic on that day before continuing to another topic si that ee can apply and experience an actual work and see if the lessons discussed will work. In that, we will not be afraid to do it later when needed and it will not make us confuse if we try it once at a time. It was a great honor and previlige to be handled and instructed by these two computer enthusiasts, Engr. Galao and Engr. Perin. I know that they have plans for us to make us a good computer engineering student but we have limited time. But despite of the lack of time we had, they still taught us what we need to learn in this subject and for our daily life. 
